## When is microbial strain sharing evidence for transmission?

**Authors**: Reena Debray, Carly C. Dickson, Shasta E. Webb, Beth Archie, Jenny Tung

**Abstract**: In humans and other social animals, social partners have more similar microbiomes than expected by chance, suggesting that social contact transfers microorganisms. However, social microbiome transmission can be difficult to identify if social partners also have other traits in common or live in a shared environment. Strain-resolved metagenomics has been proposed as a solution for tracking microbial transmission. Using a fecal microbiota transplant dataset, we show that strain sharing can recapitulate true transmission networks under ideal settings when donor-recipient pairs are unambiguous. However, gut metagenomes from a wild baboon population, where social networks predict compositional similarity, show that strain sharing is also driven by demographic and environmental factors that can override signals of social interactions. We conclude that strain-level analyses provide useful information about microbiome similarity, but other facets of study design, especially longitudinal sampling and careful consideration of host characteristics, are essential for conclusions about the underlying mechanisms.

**Contents**:


*data/longitudinal primate metagenomes*
  The data in this folder are based on baboon fecal samples collected from a wild baboon population in the south of Kenya. The raw metagenomic reads have been deposited to the NCBI Sequence Read Archive (accession #PRJNA1135081). Reads were trimmed and filtered using Trimmomatic, mapped to a microbial genome database, and compared on a pairwise basis to estimate strian sharing rates. This folder contains a table of genetic distances for each host pair-bacterial species combination generated by inStrain ("Amboseli_instrain.xlsx") and a table of genetic distances for each host pair-bacterial species combination generated by StrainPhlAn ("Amboseli_strainphlan.xlsx").

  
*data/re-analysis of fecal microbiota transplant*
  The data in this folder are based on a fecal microbiota transplant study conducted in Rome, Italy. The raw metagenomic reads were downloaded from the SRA (accession #PRJEB47909). Reads were trimmed and filtered using Trimmomatic, mapped to a microbial genome database, and compared on a pairwise basis to estimate strian sharing rates. This folder contains a table of genetic distances for each host pair-bacterial species combination generated by inStrain ("FMT_instrain.xlsx") and a table of genetic distances for each host pair-bacterial species combination generated by StrainPhlAn ("FMT_strainphlan.xlsx"). It contains lists of the species detected in each of the donors and patients in the FMT ("FMT_donor_profiles.xlsx" and "FMT_recipient_profiles.xlsx"), which were used to filter strain sharing events based on criteria relating to the prevalence of the species in the sample. It also contains a list mapping FMT donors to the corresponding recipients ("FMT_subject_list.xlsx").

  
*scripts*
  This folder contains the code that was used to run inStrain and StrainPhlAn ("Parameters for running inStrain" and "Parameters for running StrainPhlAn"). It also contains custom code that was run on the output of inStrain to link microbial scaffolds to their respective genomes ("Custom script to link scaffolds to genomes.R") and custom code that was used to estimate pairwise strain sharing rates in both datasets ("Custom script for strain sharing analysis.R").
